---
title: "Are we in need of finding new ways of distinguishing human and machine translation? A stylometric study of literary texts translated into English, French, Polish and Lithuanian"
collection: talks
type: "Presentation"
permalink: /talks/2025-12-17-talk-9
venue: "Digital Humanities and Translation Studies: On Method II"
date: 2025-12-17
location: "Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong"
---

Machine translation's quality improves on a daily basis, which comes as no surprise given the increasing
number of its users and the resulting training data. The biggest leap in translation quality occurred around
2015 when classic statistical algorithms were replaced by neural machine translators (Kenny, 2022). And
even though the resulting translation performed automatically is not perfect, with many errors (Al Sharou,
Specia, 2022), as well as harmful stereotypes (Rescigno, Monti, 2023), it has become a challenge for
stylometry and authorship attribution (Rybicki 2022; Rykowska 2025).
In order to verify if stylometry is able to distinguish human and machine translations, a corpus consisting of
a total of 2600 texts (this includes both human and machine translations), comprising of contemporary
novels originally written in Italian, Spanish, Serbian, Croatian, Greek, Japanese, Danish, Norwegian,
Swedish, Czech, Hebrew, Hungarian, Dutch, Chinese, Korean, Finnish and German, was created. Each
novel has been simultaneously translated into Polish, English, French, and Lithuanian using Google
Translate, DeepL, and
the official translator of the EU. The research hypothesis was that stylometry would fail to clearly
distinguish human and machine translation. In the case of English, the indistinguishability of machine from
human translation should be the strongest, while for Polish and Lithuanian, which represent heavily inflected
languages, it should be the weakest. However, the results of the analysis show that inflectionality of the
target language is not the main indicator. A set of other linguistic parameters has been established (including
sentence length and distribution and punctuation used) that have been tested in order to verify whether there
are visible differences between human and machine translations of the texts.
The analysis was conducted with the stylo package for R (Eder, Rybicki, Kestemont, 2016). A bootstrap
consensus method using cosine delta for the most frequent words (100 to 1000 MFWs) was applied, and the
results have been visualized using network analysis performed in Gephi (Bastian, Heymann, Jacomy 2009).
In my presentation, I will not only prove that the known stylometric methods ceased to be able to perform
their intended function for the distinction between human and machine translation, even on literary corpora,
in all of the aforementioned languages, but I will also elaborate on the linguistic factors that might be helpful
while studying the language of human- and machine-translated texts.
